=================
Troubleshooting
=================

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 1

.. _permission-denied:

Permission denied errors during installation
=============================================

Cause
-----

The ``umask`` command  determines the mask settings that control
how file permissions are set for newly created files. If you
have a very restrictive ``umask``, such as ``077``, you get
"permission denied" errors.

Solution
-----------

Set a less restrictive ``umask`` before calling conda commands.
Conda was intended as a user space tool, but often users need to
use it in a global environment. One place this can go awry is
with restrictive file permissions.  Conda creates links when you
install files that have to be read by others on the system.

To give yourself full permissions for files and directories, but
prevent the group and other users from having access:

#. Before installing, set the ``umask`` to ``007``.

#. Install conda.

#. Return the ``umask`` to the original setting:

   .. code-block:: bash

      umask 007
      conda install
      umask 077


For more information on ``umask``, see
`http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Umask <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Umask>`_.

.. _permission-denied-sudo:

Permission denied errors after using sudo conda command
=======================================================

Solution
--------

Once you run conda with sudo, you must use sudo forever. We recommend that you NEVER run conda with sudo.


.. _fix-broken-conda:

Already installed error message
================================

Cause
------

If you are trying to fix conda problems without removing the
current installation and you try to reinstall Miniconda or
Anaconda to fix it, you get an error message that Miniconda
or Anaconda is already installed, and you cannot continue.

Solution
----------

Install using the --force option.


Download and install the appropriate Miniconda
for your operating system from the `Miniconda download page
<https://conda.io/miniconda.html>`_ using the force option
``--force`` or ``-f``:

.. code-block:: bash

    bash Miniconda3-latest-MacOSX-x86_64.sh -f

NOTE: Substitute the appropriate filename and version for your
operating system.

NOTE: Be sure that you install to the same install location as
your existing install so it overwrites the core conda files and
does not install a duplicate in a new folder.


.. _conda-claims-installed:

Conda reports that a package is installed, but it appears not to be
===================================================================

Sometimes conda claims that a package is already installed, but
it does not appear to be, for example, a Python package that
gives ImportError.

There are several possible causes for this problem, each with its
own solution.

Cause
------

You are not in the same conda environment as your package.

Solution
-----------

#. Make sure that you are in the same conda environment as your
   package. The ``conda info`` command tells you what environment
   is currently active---under ``default environment``.

#. Verify that you are using the Python from the correct
   environment by running:

   .. code:: python

      import sys
      print(sys.prefix)


Cause
------
For Python packages, you have set the PYTHONPATH or PYTHONHOME
variable. These environment variables cause Python to load files
from locations other than the standard ones. Conda works best
when these environment variables are not set, as their typical
use cases are obviated by conda environments and a common issue
is that they cause Python to pick up the wrong versions or broken
versions of a library.


Solution
--------------

For Python packages, make sure you have not set the PYTHONPATH
or PYTHONHOME variables. The command ``conda info -a`` displays
the values of these environment variables.

* To unset these environment variables temporarily for the
  current Terminal session, run ``unset PYTHONPATH``.

* To unset them permanently, check for lines in the files:

  * If you use bash---``~/.bashrc``, ``~/.bash_profile``,
    ``~/.profile``.

  * If you use zsh---`~/.zshrc``.

  * If you use PowerShell on Windows, the file output by
    ``$PROFILE`` .


Cause
------

You have site-specific directories or, for Python, you have
so-called site-specific files. These are typically located in
``~/.local`` on Linux and macOS. For a full description of the locations of
site-specific packages, see `PEP 370
<http://legacy.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0370/>`_.  As with
PYTHONPATH, Python may try importing packages from this
directory, which can cause issues.

Solution
--------------

For Python packages, remove site-specific directories and
site-specific files.

Cause
------

For C libraries, the following environment variables have been
set:

* macOS---DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH.
* Linux---LD_LIBRARY_PATH.

These act similarly to ``PYTHONPATH`` for Python. If they are
set, they can cause libraries to be loaded from locations other
than the conda environment. Conda environments obviate most use
cases for these variables. The command ``conda info -a`` shows
what these are set to.

Solution
-----------

Unset DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH or LD_LIBRARY_PATH.


Cause
------

Occasionally, an installed package becomes corrupted. Conda works
by unpacking the packages in the ``pkgs`` directory and then
hard-linking them to the environment. Sometimes these get
corrupted, breaking all environments that use them, and also any
additional environments, since the same files are hard-linked
each time.


Solution
----------

Run the command ``conda install -f`` to unarchive the package
again and relink it. It also does an md5 verification on the
package. Usually if this is different, it is because your
channels have changed and there is a different package with the
same name, version, and build number.

NOTE: This breaks the links to any other environments that
already had this package installed, so you have to reinstall it
there, too. It also means that running ``conda install -f`` a lot
can use up a lot of disk space if you have a lot of environments.

NOTE: The ``-f`` flag to ``conda install`` (``--force``) implies
``--no-deps``, so ``conda install -f package`` does not reinstall
any of the dependencies of ``package``.


.. _DistributionNotFound:

pkg_resources.DistributionNotFound: conda==3.6.1-6-gb31b0d4-dirty
=================================================================

Cause
------

The local version of conda needs updating.

Solution
----------

Force reinstall conda. A useful way to work off the development
version of conda is to run ``python setup.py develop`` on a
checkout of the `conda git repository
<https://github.com/conda/conda>`_. However, if you are not
regularly running ``git pull``, it is a good idea to un-develop,
as you will otherwise not get any regular updates to conda. The
normal way to do this is to run ``python setup.py develop -u``.

However, this command does not replace the ``conda`` script
itself. With other packages, this is not an issue, as you can
just reinstall them with ``conda``, but conda cannot be used if
conda is installed.

The fix is to use the ``./bin/conda`` executable in the conda
git repository to force reinstall conda, that is, run
``./bin/conda install -f conda``.  You can then verify with
``conda info`` that you have the latest version of conda, and not
a git checkout---the version should not include any hashes.


.. _unknown-locale:

macOS error "ValueError unknown locale: UTF-8"
===============================================

Cause
------

This is a bug in the macOS Terminal app that shows up only in
certain locales. Locales are country-language combinations.


Solution
---------

#. Open Terminal in ``/Applications/Utilities``

#. Clear the Set locale environment variables on startup checkbox.

   .. figure:: /img/conda_locale.jpg

      ..

   |

This sets your LANG environment variable to be empty. This may
cause Terminal use to incorrect settings for your locale. The
``locale`` command in Terminal tells you what settings are used.

To use the correct language, add a line to your bash profile,
which is typically ``~/.profile``:

.. code-block:: bash

   export LANG=your-lang

NOTE: Replace ``your-lang`` with the correct locale specifier for
your language.

The command ``locale -a`` displays all the specifiers. For
example, the language code for US English is ``en_US.UTF-8``. The
locale affects what translations are used when they are available
and also how dates, currencies and decimals are formatted.


.. _AttributeError-getproxies:

AttributeError or missing getproxies
====================================

When running a command such as ``conda update ipython``, you may
get an ``AttributeError: 'module' object has no attribute
'getproxies'``.

Cause
------

This can be caused by an old version of ``requests`` or by having
the ``PYTHONPATH`` environment variable set.

Solution
--------

Update ``requests`` and be sure ``PYTHONPATH`` is not set:

#. Run ``conda info -a`` to show the ``requests`` version and
   various environment variables such as ``PYTHONPATH``.

#. Update the ``requests`` version with
   ``pip install -U requests``.

#. Clear ``PYTHONPATH``:

   * On Windows, clear it the environment variable settings.

   * On macOS and Linux, clear it by removing it from the bash
     profile and restarting the shell.


.. _shell-command-location:

Shell commands open from the wrong location
===========================================

When you run a command within a conda environment, conda does not
access the correct package executable.

Cause
-------

In both bash and zsh, when you enter a command, the shell
searches the paths in PATH one by one until it finds the command.
The shell then caches the location, which is called hashing in
shell terminology. When you run command again, the shell does not
have to search the PATH again.

The problem is that before you installed the program, you ran a command which
loaded and hashed another version of that program in some other location on
the PATH, such as ``/usr/bin``. Then you installed the program
using ``conda install``, but the shell still had the old instance
hashed.


Solution
---------

Reactivate the environment or run ``hash -r`` (in bash) or
``rehash`` (in zsh).

When you run ``source activate``, conda automatically runs
``hash -r`` in bash and ``rehash`` in zsh to clear the hashed
commands, so conda finds things in the new path on the PATH. But
there is no way to do this when ``conda install`` is run because
the command must be run inside the shell itself, meaning either
you have to run the command yourself or use source a file that
contains the command.

This is a relatively rare problem, since this happens only in the
following circumstances:

#. You activate an environment or use the root environment, and
   then run a command from somewhere else.

#. Then you conda install a program, and then try to run the
   program again without running ``activate`` or
   ``deactivate``.

The command ``type command_name`` always tells you exactly what
is being run. This is better than ``which command_name``, which
ignores hashed commands and searches the PATH directly.
The hash is reset by ``source activate``, or by ``hash -r`` in bash or
``rehash`` in zsh.


.. _wrong-python:

Programs fail due to invoking conda Python instead of system Python
===================================================================

Cause
------

After installing Anaconda or Miniconda, programs that run
``python`` switch from invoking the system Python to invoking the
Python in the root conda environment. If these programs rely on
the system Python to have certain configurations or dependencies
that are not in the root conda environment Python, the programs
may crash. For example, some users of the Cinnamon desktop
environment on Linux Mint have reported these crashes.


Solution
---------

Edit your ``.bash_profile`` and ``.bashrc`` files so that the
conda binary directory, such as ``~/miniconda3/bin``, is no
longer added to the PATH environment variable. You can still run
``conda`` ``activate`` and ``deactivate`` by using their full
path names, such as ``~/miniconda3/bin/conda``.

You may also create a folder with symbolic links to ``conda``,
``activate`` and ``deactivate``, and then edit your
``.bash_profile`` or ``.bashrc`` file to add this folder to your
PATH. If you do this, running ``python`` will invoke the system
Python, but running ``conda`` commands, ``source activate MyEnv``,
``source activate root``, or ``source deactivate`` will work
normally.

After running ``source activate`` to activate any environment,
including after running ``source activate root``, running
``python`` will invoke the Python in the active conda environment.


.. _unsatisfiable:

UnsatisfiableSpecifications error
====================================

Cause
-------

Some conda package installation specifications are impossible to
satisfy. For example, ``conda create -n tmp python=3 wxpython=3``
produces an "Unsatisfiable Specifications" error because wxPython
3 depends on Python 2.7, so the specification to install Python 3
conflicts with the specification to install wxPython 3.

When an unsatisfiable request is made to conda, conda shows a
message such as this one::

    The following specifications were found to be in conflict:
    - python 3*
    - wxpython 3* -> python 2.7*
    Use "conda info <package>" to see the dependencies for each package.

This indicates that the specification to install wxpython 3
depends on installing Python 2.7, which conflicts with the
specification to install python 3.

Solution
----------

Use "conda info wxpython" or "conda info wxpython=3" to show
information about this package and its dependencies::

    wxpython 3.0 py27_0
    -------------------
    file name   : wxpython-3.0-py27_0.tar.bz2
    name        : wxpython
    version     : 3.0
    build number: 0
    build string: py27_0
    channel     : defaults
    size        : 34.1 MB
    date        : 2014-01-10
    fn          : wxpython-3.0-py27_0.tar.bz2
    license_family: Other
    md5         : adc6285edfd29a28224c410a39d4bdad
    priority    : 2
    schannel    : defaults
    url         : https://repo.continuum.io/pkgs/free/osx-64/wxpython-3.0-py27_0.tar.bz2
    dependencies:
        python 2.7*
        python.app


By examining the dependencies of each package, you should be able
to determine why the installation request produced a conflict and
modify the request so it can be satisfied without conflicts. In
this example, you could install wxPython with Python 2.7::

    conda create -n tmp python=2.7 wxpython=3


.. _version-from-channel:

Package installation fails from a specific channel
====================================================

Cause
-------

Sometimes it is necessary to install a specific version from a
specific channel because that version is not available from the
default channel.


Solution
---------

The following example describes the problem in detail and its
solution.

Suppose you have a specific need to install the Python
``cx_freeze`` module with Python 3.4. A first step is to create a
Python 3.4 environment:

.. code-block:: bash

   conda create -n py34 python=3.4

Using this environment you should first attempt:

.. code-block:: bash

   conda install -n py34 cx_freeze

However, when you do this you get the following error::

   Using Anaconda Cloud api site https://api.anaconda.org
   Fetching package metadata .........
   Solving package specifications: .
   Error: Package missing in current osx-64 channels:
   - cx_freeze

   You can search for packages on anaconda.org with

     anaconda search -t conda cx_freeze

The message indicates that ``cx_freeze`` cannot be found in the
default package channels. However, there may be a
community-created version available and you can search for it by
running the following command:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ anaconda search -t conda cx_freeze
   Using Anaconda Cloud api site https://api.anaconda.org
   Run 'anaconda show <USER/PACKAGE>' to get more details:
   Packages:
        Name                      |  Version | Package Types   | Platforms
        ------------------------- |   ------ | --------------- | ---------------
        inso/cx_freeze            |    4.3.3 | conda           | linux-64
        pyzo/cx_freeze            |    4.3.3 | conda           | linux-64, win-32, win-64, linux-32, osx-64
                                             : http://cx-freeze.sourceforge.net/
        silg2/cx_freeze           |    4.3.4 | conda           | linux-64
                                             : create standalone executables from Python scripts
        takluyver/cx_freeze       |    4.3.3 | conda           | linux-64
   Found 4 packages


In this example, there are 4 different places that you could try
to get the package. None of them are officially supported or
endorsed by Anaconda, but members of the conda community have
provided many valuable packages. If you want to go with public
opinion, then `the web interface
<https://anaconda.org/search?q=cx_freeze>`_ provides more
information:

.. figure:: /img/conda_package-popularity.png
   :alt: cx_freeze packages on anaconda.org

   ..

|

Notice that the ``pyzo`` organization has by far the most
downloads, so you might choose to use their package. If so, you
can add their organization's channel by specifying it on the
command line:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ conda create -c pyzo -n cxfreeze_py34 cx_freeze python=3.4
   Using Anaconda Cloud api site https://api.anaconda.org
   Fetching package metadata: ..........
   Solving package specifications: .........

   Package plan for installation in environment /Users/ijstokes/anaconda/envs/cxfreeze_py34:

   The following packages will be downloaded:

       package                    |            build
       ---------------------------|-----------------
       cx_freeze-4.3.3            |           py34_4         1.8 MB
       setuptools-20.7.0          |           py34_0         459 KB
       ------------------------------------------------------------
                                              Total:         2.3 MB

   The following NEW packages will be INSTALLED:

       cx_freeze:  4.3.3-py34_4
       openssl:    1.0.2h-0
       pip:        8.1.1-py34_1
       python:     3.4.4-0
       readline:   6.2-2
       setuptools: 20.7.0-py34_0
       sqlite:     3.9.2-0
       tk:         8.5.18-0
       wheel:      0.29.0-py34_0
       xz:         5.0.5-1
       zlib:       1.2.8-0


Now you have a software environment sandbox created with Python
3.4 and ``cx_freeze``.


.. _auto-upgrade:

Conda automatically upgrades to unwanted version
===================================================

When making a python package for an app, you create an
environment for the app from a file ``req.txt`` that sets a
certain version, such as ``python=2.7.9``. However, when you
``conda install`` your package, it automatically upgrades to a
later version, such as ``2.7.10``.

Cause
------

If you make a conda package for the app using conda build, you
can set dependencies with specific version numbers. In :doc:`this
example <tasks/build-packages/define-metadata>`, the
requirements lines that say ``- python`` could be
``- python ==2.7.9`` instead. It is important to have 1 space
before the == operator and no space after.

Solution
---------

Exercise caution when coding version requirements.


ValidationError: Invalid value for timestamp
=============================================

Cause
------

This happens when certain packages are installed with conda 4.3.28, and then
conda is downgraded to 4.3.27 or earlier.

Solution
---------

See https://github.com/conda/conda/issues/6096.

